I mentioned in the previous section that we are going to take an experimental approach to understanding
deep learning.
That means that we are going to be running lots of experiments.
And when running experiments, one of the things that we need to do is determine whether one particular
model, architecture or set of meta parameters is better than a different architecture or a different
set of meta parameters.
So how do we determine whether our experiment was successful?
How do we determine whether one model architecture is significantly better than another?
So the answer to that question is a t test.
We are going to be performing t tests.
So what is a t test?
A t test is a way to determine whether data drawn from one distribution is significantly different from
data drawn from another distribution or another sample.
So imagine each of these little circles here corresponds to the accuracy of a model with architecture
A, and this is model architecture B.
So we have a bunch of prediction or categorization accuracies here and here.
And we want to know whether, you know, model A is significantly better than model B, which would
mean that the accuracies for model A are significantly higher than the accuracies for model B.
And the way that we test this is using a t test.
So h a here corresponds to stands for the alternative hypothesis.
So the hypothesis is that this model is significantly different from this model.
So this is the alternative hypothesis.
And we evaluate the alternative hypothesis relative to what's called a null hypothesis.
It's often written down as h sub zero for h naught or h null.
So this is the null hypothesis.
The null hypothesis states that the two models perform equally well, so that means that we could mix
up all of the accuracies from the two models, and it doesn't change the average accuracy from model
from this collection versus this collection, because the two models perform equally well.
So the goal of the T test is to provide evidence against the null hypothesis.
And if there is enough evidence strong enough evidence against the null hypothesis, then we go with
the alternative hypothesis, which would be that this model is significantly better than this model.
And that's how we distinguish between different kinds of models and their performance on data sets.
By the way, it's also possible to use a t test for one set of model performance data against some arbitrary
null value, for example, 50% accuracy.
Let's say if the model is doing, you know, two two alternative choice discrimination than 50% would
be would correspond to accuracy of chance.
So we can test whether the model is doing significantly better than chance level of 50%.
However, in this course, we are mostly going to be using the t test to compare different model architectures
or different model parameters directly against each other, like this.
So here is the basic formula for the t test.
The t test gives us one single value.
That's the t value.
And it's governed by this pretty simple equation.
So we have the mean of x minus the mean of y divided by s which corresponds to the standard deviation
itself normalized by the square root of n and n.
Here corresponds to the number of times that we repeat the model.
So if we rerun the model let's say 20 times then this would be the square root of 20.
Now don't worry too much about the math because we are going to be we're going to allow SciPy, a Python
library to implement to compute the t value for us.
What I want you to remember.
The important thing to remember here is what this formula means.
So the t test.
The t value is the difference of the means divided by the standard deviations.
All.
You just have to remember this concept.
The difference of the means divided by or normalized by the standard deviations.
That gives us a t value.
And then what do we do with this t value.
Well we have to evaluate this t value relative to a distribution of t values that we would expect under
the null hypothesis.
Again the null hypothesis is that there are no differences between the two different model architectures.
So the two model architectures are the same.
And any differences we might observe.
Any minor differences between the two models in terms of their performance is not actually due to the
models, it's actually just due to random sampling variability.
So here you see again this concept of sampling variability and randomness appearing.
So given random sampling variability you would expect that the model accuracies would differ a little
bit just by random chance.
And so what you see here is a t distribution a distribution of t statistic values that we expect under
the null hypothesis.
This is not something that we compute.
This is something we analytically derive from a formula.
Of course SciPy implements that.
So SciPy is taking care of the details of this for us.
So then we compute our observed t value in the real data.
These are the real data that we have measured in our deep learning models.
And we compare this value.
Let's say this t value is 1.5.
We compare this value against a statistical significance threshold.
And this threshold comes from specifying a p value threshold of, for example, 0.05.
So 0.05 is a pretty typical value.
0.05 means that there is a 5% chance that we observed a statistic of this size, given these data purely
by chance, just by random sampling variability.
So in this particular example, we have a t value of 1.5.
And that is below the threshold.
So below the significance threshold.
So the p value is 0.065.
And what does this mean.
Well this means that our two different models are two different deep learning model architectures actually
gave the same performance, which means that the models perform equally well.
There is no real significant meaningful difference between the two models in terms of how they perform
on a given data set.
Now, if the models were more different from each other, then the T value would be larger, which means
that this yellow arrow here would be to the right of this significance threshold.
This corresponding p value would be below 0.05.
And then we would interpret that result as saying that one model is significantly better.
It has better higher accuracy than the other models.
So therefore we should prefer the model that has higher accuracy.
Now let's switch to Python and I will show you how to implement a t test using SciPy.
So here we import our libraries pretty standard to import numpy and matplotlib.
Here I'm also importing scipy.stats.
So this is actually a submodule of the scipy library.
And we're going to abbreviate it as stats.
Okay.
So let's run the code in this cell to import all of these libraries.
Here what I'm doing is generating random data.
This is just, you know, just coming up with some fake data just to illustrate how the SciPy dot stats
library works.
So here you can see I'm generating random numbers with some number of samples.
And here it's actually a different number of samples.
And then I'm adding a mean offset.
So this is the the mean of data set one.
And this is the mean of data set two.
And then we're going to plot those two samples.
So here we see all of the samples from group one samples from group two.
So visually it's obvious that group two is a little bit higher than group one.
But the question is is this a statistically significant difference between these two groups?
Right.
It's not so obvious that every single data point is higher.
You can see there's quite a bit of overlap here.
Okay.
So is this difference in the means between the two groups a statistically significant difference.
So to do that we are going to use stats dot t test I.
And the IND is for independent samples.
Now there are several different varieties of t tests.
There are several different formulas that you would use depending on the nature of the data.
Explaining all these different variants of a T test is something you would get into in a statistics
course or machine learning, like a traditional statistics or machine learning course.
Here in this deep learning course, we're only going to be using the independent samples t test okay.
So we call the t test function input the two data set.
So again in the context of this course this is going to be all of the accuracies from model one.
And this will be all of the accuracies of model two.
And the outputs of the stats dot t test function is t and p comes out as a tuple.
And the the first output is the t value.
And then we get the p value.
So in this case the t value is minus four and the p value is less than 0.05.
It's actually much, much less than 0.05.
So in this case, the t test is telling us that group two has a significant, statistically significantly
larger mean than group one.
Now why is this T value negative here?
Well the sign of a t statistic is pretty arbitrary.
It just depends on the order that you input the two sets of samples.
So for example now I'm going to change this to data two and data one.
So now it's the larger mean minus the smaller mean.
So now you'll see this number is going to be exactly the same.
But it's going to be plus four instead of minus four.
Okay.
So this is one way to show the data.
But notice that you know it's kind of hard to see all of the data values here because they are all overlapping,
particularly in this case where I'm plotting them as squares.
So what I'm going to show you now is a different way of visualizing the data, which just makes it a
little bit easier to look at.
So here what I'm doing is adding an x coordinate value.
That is just random numbers.
These are pure random numbers.
I'm scaling them down by 15.
There's nothing special about 15.
It's an arbitrary number that I just came up with based on visualization.
And let me show you what this does.
So here you see it just gives some random x axis offsets to these data points.
That just makes it a little bit easier to visualize what the distribution looks like.
This is pretty commonly done.
A few other things.
Or one more thing I want to mention about this plotting.
I said, by the way, earlier in this course that if you are relatively new to Python, then you can
also use this course as an opportunity to improve your Python coding skills.
And throughout the rest of this course, I'm going to try to slowly and gently introduce you to new
and more advanced features of Python coding and Python visualization.
So here I am modifying the built in parameters.
I'm updating the the Python parameters.
And in particular I'm inputting a dictionary.
And the dictionary is going to specify that the font size should be 12.
So just to illustrate what happens here we can change this to 20.
And now you know it's a little the font size is a little too big I think.
But you know it gets the point home.
Now after this video, what I would like you to do is spend a few moments with this code.
Actually, the whole code script, not just this cell, and play around with some of these parameters
that I have specified here.
For example, you can try changing this value now just increasing this to 150.
This also looks pretty good I think maybe it's a little bit too tight.
So this is something you can play around with.
And more importantly, I would like you to play around with some of these parameters the ends and the
muse.
So for example, let's see if we set this to 1.2.
So now the two samples are they differ in their population means by a value a distance of 0.2 instead
of two.
So that's going to create two distributions that are closer to each other.
And we can see now this is not at all statistically significantly different right.
The p value has to be below 0.05 in order for the result to be significant.
In this video I introduce you to the general idea of the t test and the basic formula of the T test.
There are many different variations of a t test in this course.
We are going to keep it pretty simple, pretty straightforward.
And we're going to be using the t test as a means to explore and run experiments on different deep learning
models.
And that's a way for us to learn more about different kinds of architectures and how they perform.